feat!: added attestation-based client authentication (#138)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/pid-eaa-issuance.rst

    **Federation Check:** The Wallet Instance needs to check if the PID/(Q)EAA Provider is part of the Federation, obtaining then its protocol specific Metadata. A non-normative example of a response from the endpoint **.well-known/openid-federation** with the **Entity Configuration** and the **Metadata** of the PID/(Q)EAA Provider is represented within the section `Entity Configuration Credential Issuer`_.

> **Steps 5-6 (PAR Request):** The Wallet Instance creates a fresh PKCE code verifier, Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession, and ``state`` parameter for the *Pushed Authorization Request*. The Wallet Instance sends these parameters along in a *Pushed Authorization Request* using the OIDC ``request`` parameter (hereafter Request Object) (see :rfc:`9126` Section 3) to the PID/(Q)EAA Provider PAR endpoint to prevent Request URI swapping attack (see :rfc:`9126`). The Wallet Instance MUST create the ``code_verifier`` with enough entropy random string using the unreserved characters with a minimum length of 43 characters and a maximum length of 128 characters, making it impractical for an attacker to guess its value. The value MUST be generated following the recommendation in Section 4.1 of :rfc:`7636`. The Wallet Instance signs this request using the private key that is created during the setup phase to obtain the Wallet Instance Attestation. The related public key that is attested by the Wallet Provider is inside the Wallet Instance Attestation ``cnf`` claim. An OAuth2 client authentication method is involved, since in this flow the Pushed Authorization Endpoint is a protected endpoint. The client authentication is based on the model defined in OAuth 2.0 Attestation-based Client Authentication [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_]. The value of the ``client_assertion`` parameter is set to a value containing two JWTs, separated by a ``~`` character. It MUST NOT contain more or less than precisely two JWTs separated by the ``~`` character. The first JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation JWT and the second JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession. The authorization_details [RAR :rfc:`9396`] parameter is extended to allow Wallet Instance to specify the types of credentials when requesting authorization for the PID/(Q)EAA issuance. The PID/(Q)EAA Provider performs the following checks upon the receipt of the PAR request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Steps 5-6 (PAR Request):** The Wallet Instance creates a fresh PKCE code verifier, Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession, and ``state`` parameter for the *Pushed Authorization Request*. The Wallet Instance sends these parameters along in a *Pushed Authorization Request* using the OIDC ``request`` parameter (hereafter Request Object) (see :rfc:`9126` Section 3) to the PID/(Q)EAA Provider PAR endpoint to prevent Request URI swapping attack (see :rfc:`9126`). The Wallet Instance MUST create the ``code_verifier`` with enough entropy random string using the unreserved characters with a minimum length of 43 characters and a maximum length of 128 characters, making it impractical for an attacker to guess its value. The value MUST be generated following the recommendation in Section 4.1 of :rfc:`7636`. The Wallet Instance signs this request using the private key that is created during the setup phase to obtain the Wallet Instance Attestation. The related public key that is attested by the Wallet Provider is inside the Wallet Instance Attestation ``cnf`` claim. An OAuth 2.0 client authentication method is involved, since in this flow the Pushed Authorization Endpoint is a protected endpoint. The client authentication is based on the model defined in OAuth 2.0 Attestation-based Client Authentication [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_]. The value of the ``client_assertion`` parameter is set to a value containing two JWTs, separated by a ``~`` character. It MUST NOT contain more or less than precisely two JWTs separated by the ``~`` character. The first JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation JWT and the second JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession. The authorization_details [RAR :rfc:`9396`] parameter is extended to allow Wallet Instance to specify the types of credentials when requesting authorization for the PID/(Q)EAA issuance. The PID/(Q)EAA Provider performs the following checks upon the receipt of the PAR request:
```

Reviewer: text like 
````
The value of the ``client_assertion`` parameter is set to a value containing two JWTs, separated by a ``~`` character. It MUST NOT contain more or less than precisely two JWTs separated by the ``~`` character. 
````

is repeated very often in the document, could we reference a single place instead of copy/paste it?
editorial.

> **Steps 5-6 (PAR Request):** The Wallet Instance creates a fresh PKCE code verifier, Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession, and ``state`` parameter for the *Pushed Authorization Request*. The Wallet Instance sends these parameters along in a *Pushed Authorization Request* using the OIDC ``request`` parameter (hereafter Request Object) (see :rfc:`9126` Section 3) to the PID/(Q)EAA Provider PAR endpoint to prevent Request URI swapping attack (see :rfc:`9126`). The Wallet Instance MUST create the ``code_verifier`` with enough entropy random string using the unreserved characters with a minimum length of 43 characters and a maximum length of 128 characters, making it impractical for an attacker to guess its value. The value MUST be generated following the recommendation in Section 4.1 of :rfc:`7636`. The Wallet Instance signs this request using the private key that is created during the setup phase to obtain the Wallet Instance Attestation. The related public key that is attested by the Wallet Provider is inside the Wallet Instance Attestation ``cnf`` claim. An OAuth 2.0 client authentication method is involved, since in this flow the Pushed Authorization Endpoint is a protected endpoint. The client authentication is based on the model defined in OAuth 2.0 Attestation-based Client Authentication [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_]. The value of the ``client_assertion`` parameter is set to a value containing two JWTs, separated by a ``~`` character. It MUST NOT contain more or less than precisely two JWTs separated by the ``~`` character. The first JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation JWT and the second JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession. The authorization_details [RAR :rfc:`9396`] parameter is extended to allow Wallet Instance to specify the types of credentials when requesting authorization for the PID/(Q)EAA issuance. The PID/(Q)EAA Provider performs the following checks upon the receipt of the PAR request:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Steps 5-6 (PAR Request):** The Wallet Instance:
* creates a fresh PKCE code verifier, Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession, and ``state`` parameter for the *Pushed Authorization Request*. 
* provides to the PID/(Q)EAA Provider PAR endpoint the parameters previously listed above, using the ``request`` parameter (hereafter Request Object) according to :rfc:`9126` Section 3  to prevent Request URI swapping attack. 
* MUST create the ``code_verifier`` with enough entropy random string using the unreserved characters with a minimum length of 43 characters and a maximum length of 128 characters, making it impractical for an attacker to guess its value. The value MUST be generated following the recommendation in Section 4.1 of :rfc:`7636`. 
* signs this request using the private key that is created during the setup phase to obtain the Wallet Instance Attestation. The related public key that is attested by the Wallet Provider is provided within the Wallet Instance Attestation ``cnf`` claim. 
* MUST create the value of the ``client_assertion`` parameter according to OAuth 2.0 Attestation-based Client Authentication [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_], since in this flow the Pushed Authorization Endpoint is a protected endpoint. The ``client_assertion`` value MUST NOT contain more or less than precisely two JWTs separated by the ``~`` character. The first JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation JWT and the second JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession. 
* specifies the types of the requested credentials using the ``authorization_details`` [RAR :rfc:`9396`] parameter. The PID/(Q)EAA Provider performs the following checks upon the receipt of the PAR request:
```

Vorrei meno testo, meno discorsivo, più schematico. Per questa ragione propongo un elenco puntato, per dare un riferimento puntuale all'implementatore

    8. It MUST check that the Request Object is not expired by checking the ``exp`` claim (:rfc:`9126`).
    9. It MUST check that the Request Object was issued at a time acceptable by the PID/(Q)EAA Provider by checking the ``iat`` claim. For example, basing on the security policies of the PID/(Q)EAA Provider, it might reject the request if the ``iat`` claim is too far away from the current time (:rfc:`9126`).
    10. It MUST check that the ``jti`` claim in the Request Object has not been used before by the Wallet Instance identified by the ``client_id``. This allows the PID/(Q)EAA Provider to mitigate replay attacks (:rfc:`7519`).

>     11. It MUST validate the ``client_assertion`` parameter based on Sections 4.1 and 4.2 of [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    11. It MUST validate the ``client_assertion`` parameter based on Sections 4.1 and 4.2 of [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_].
```

    &code_challenge_method=S256
    &request=eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6ImsyYmRjIn0.ew0KIC Jpc3MiOiAiczZCaGRSa3F0MyIsDQogImF1ZCI6ICJodHRwczovL3NlcnZlci5leGFtcGxlLmNvbSIsDQo gInJlc3BvbnNlX3R5cGUiOiAiY29kZSBpZF90b2tlbiIsDQogImNsaWVudF9pZCI6ICJzNkJoZFJrcXQz IiwNCiAicmVkaXJlY3RfdXJpIjogImh0dHBzOi8vY2xpZW50LmV4YW1...
    &client_assertion_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-client-attestation
    &client_assertion=WIA~WIA-PoP 

An example of Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession is as the following:

.. code-block:: JSON

  {    
    "alg": "ES256",
    "kid": "vbeXJksM45xphtANnCiG6mCyuU4jfGNzopGuKvogg9c",
    "typ": "jwt-client-attestation-pop",

>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  .
```

  {
    "iss": "vbeXJksM45xphtANnCiG6mCyuU4jfGNzopGuKvogg9c",
    "aud": "https://pid-provider.example.org",
    "jti":"ad25868c-8377-479b-8094-46fb1e797625",
    "iat": 1686645115,
    "exp": 1686652315
  }

The JWS of Request Object is represented below:

.. code-block:: JSON

  {
    "alg": "ES256",
    "kid": "FifYx03bnosD8m6gYQIfNHNP9cM_Sam9Tc5nLloIIrc",

>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  .
```

    &code_challenge_method=S256
    &request=eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6ImsyYmRjIn0.ew0KIC Jpc3MiOiAiczZCaGRSa3F0MyIsDQogImF1ZCI6ICJodHRwczovL3NlcnZlci5leGFtcGxlLmNvbSIsDQo gInJlc3BvbnNlX3R5cGUiOiAiY29kZSBpZF90b2tlbiIsDQogImNsaWVudF9pZCI6ICJzNkJoZFJrcXQz IiwNCiAicmVkaXJlY3RfdXJpIjogImh0dHBzOi8vY2xpZW50LmV4YW1...
    &client_assertion_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-client-attestation

>     &client_assertion=WIA~WIA-PoP 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    &client_assertion=$WIA~WIA-PoP 
```

An example of Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession is as the following:

.. code-block:: 

  {    
    "alg": "ES256",
    "kid": "vbeXJksM45xphtANnCiG6mCyuU4jfGNzopGuKvogg9c",
    "typ": "jwt-client-attestation-pop",
  }
  .
  {
    "iss": "vbeXJksM45xphtANnCiG6mCyuU4jfGNzopGuKvogg9c",
    "aud": "https://pid-provider.example.org",

>     "jti":"ad25868c-8377-479b-8094-46fb1e797625",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "jti": "ad25868c-8377-479b-8094-46fb1e797625",
```

    &code=SplxlOBeZQQYbYS6WxSbIA
    &redirect_uri=eudiw://start.wallet.example.org
    &code_verifier=dBjftJeZ4CVP-mB92K27uhbUJU1p1r_wW1gFWFOEjXk
    &client_assertion_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-client-attestation

>     &client_assertion=WIA~WIA-PoP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    &client_assertion=$WIA~WIA-PoP
```

Pushed Authorization Request (PAR) Request
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The requests to the PID/(Q)EAA authorization endpoint MUST be HTTP with method POST, using the mandatory parameters listed below within the HTTP request message body. These MUST be encoded in ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` format. The Pushed Authorization Endpoint is a protected endpoint with a client authentication based on the model defined in OAuth 2.0 Attestation-based Client Authentication [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The requests to the PID/(Q)EAA authorization endpoint MUST be HTTP with method POST, using the mandatory parameters listed below within the HTTP request message body. These MUST be encoded in ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` format. The Pushed Authorization Endpoint is a protected endpoint with a client authentication based on the model defined in OAuth 2.0 Attestation-based Client Authentication [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_].
```

Pushed Authorization Request (PAR) Request
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The requests to the PID/(Q)EAA authorization endpoint MUST be HTTP with method POST, using the mandatory parameters listed below within the HTTP request message body. These MUST be encoded in ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` format. The Pushed Authorization Endpoint is a protected endpoint with a client authentication based on the model defined in OAuth 2.0 Attestation-based Client Authentication [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The requests to the PID/(Q)EAA authorization endpoint MUST use the HTTP POST method with the parameters in the message body encoded in ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` format. The Pushed Authorization Endpoint is protected with OAuth 2.0 Attestation-based Client Authentication [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_] and the following parameters MUST be provided:
```

      - `OpenID Connect Core. Section 6 <https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#JWTRequests>`_
    * - **client_assertion_type**
      - It MUST be set to ``urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-client-attestation``.

>       - `oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_.
```

    * - **client_assertion**
      - It MUST be set to a value containing two JWTs, separated by a ``~`` character. It MUST NOT contain more or less than precisely two JWTs separated by the ``~`` character. The first JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation JWT and the second JWT MUST be the Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession.

>       - `oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_.
```

      - `OpenID Connect Core. Section 6 <https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html#JWTRequests>`_
    * - **client_assertion_type**
      - It MUST be set to ``urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-client-attestation``.
      - `oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_.
    * - **client_assertion**

>       - It MUST be set to a value containing the Wallet Instance Attestation JWT and the Proof of Possession, separated by a ``~`` character. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - It MUST be set to a value containing the Wallet Instance Attestation JWT and the Proof of Possession, separated with the ``~`` character. 
```

--------------

The token endpoint is used by the Wallet Instance to obtain an Access Token by presenting its authorization grant, as 
defined in :rfc:`6749`. The Token Endpoint is a protected endpoint with a client authentication based on the model defined in OAuth 2.0 Attestation-based Client Authentication [`oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_].

Token Request
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The request to the PID/(Q)EAA Token endpoint MUST be an HTTP request with method POST, where its body message is encoded in ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` format. The Wallet Instance sends the Token endpoint request with ``client_assertion_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-client-attestation`` and ``client_assertion=WIA~WIA-PoP``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The request to the PID/(Q)EAA Token endpoint MUST be an HTTP request with method POST, with the body message encoded in ``application/x-www-form-urlencoded`` format. The Wallet Instance sends the Token endpoint request with ``client_assertion_type=urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-client-attestation`` and ``client_assertion=WIA~WIA-PoP``.
```

      - Verification code of the **code_challenge**.
      - `Proof Key for Code Exchange by OAuth Public Clients <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636>`_.
    * - **client_assertion_type**
      - It MUST be set to ``urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-client-attestation``.
      - `oauth-attestation-draft <https://vcstuff.github.io/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth/draft-ietf-oauth-attestation-based-client-auth.html>`_.
    * - **client_assertion**

>       - It MUST be set to a value containing the Wallet Instance Attestation JWT and the Proof of Possession JWT, separated by a ``~`` character (WIA~WIA-PoP). The Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession MUST contain the claims as in the :ref:`Table of the JWT Wallet Instance Attestation PoP <table_jwt_pop>` in the Section :ref:`Pushed Authorization Request (PAR) Response<sec_par>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - It MUST be set to a value containing the Wallet Instance Attestation JWT and the Proof of Possession JWT, separated with the ``~`` character (WIA~WIA-PoP). The Wallet Instance Attestation Proof of Possession MUST contain the claims as defined in :ref:`Table of the JWT Wallet Instance Attestation PoP <table_jwt_pop>`, Section :ref:`Pushed Authorization Request (PAR) Response<sec_par>`.
```
